Cui, R., Li, M., & Zhang, S. (2022). AI and procurement. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management, 24(2), 691-706.

Abstract
In a world advancing toward Articial Intelligence (AI), we explore how AI creates and delivers value
in procurement. AI has two unique abilities: automation and smartness, which are associated with phys-
ical machines or software that enable us to operate more eciently and eectively. In this research, we
study how buyers' usage of AI aects suppliers' price quoting strategies. Specically, we study the impact
of automation|i.e., the buyer uses a chatbot to automatically inquire about prices instead of asking in
person|and the impact of smartness|i.e., the buyer signals the usage of a smart AI algorithm in selecting
the supplier. We collaborate with a trading company to run a eld experiment on an online platform in
which we compare suppliers' wholesale price quotes across female, male, and chatbot buyer types under AI
and no recommendation conditions. We nd that, when not equipped with a smart control, there is price
discrimination against chatbot buyers who receive a higher wholesale price quote than human buyers. In fact,
without smartness, automation alone receives the highest quoted wholesale price. However, signaling the
use of a smart recommendation system can eectively reduce suppliers' price quote for chatbot buyers. We
also show that AI delivers the most value when buyers adopt automation and smartness simultaneously in
procurement. Our results imply that automation is not very valuable when implemented without smartness,
which in turn suggests that building smartness is necessary before considering high levels of autonomy. Our
study unlocks the optimal steps that buyers could adopt to develop AI in procurement processes.

Keywords: articial intelligence, procurement, wholesale pricing, automation, smartness

1. Introduction
Articial intelligence (AI) is related to making machines or software mimic human behavior and
intelligence, and eventually supersede or augment human work. AI is becoming the new operational
foundation of business, and has transformed the very nature of companies|how they
operate and how they compete (Iansiti and Lakhani, 2020). AI has two unique capabilities: automa-
tion and smartness, which are associated with physical machines or software that replace manual
work through automated processes or augment human work through smart decisions (Boute and
1

2
Van Mieghem, 2020). AI can automate simple, tedious, and repetitive tasks to perform them faster
and cheaper. AI can also facilitate smarter control rules by continuously learning, reasoning, deciding,
and acting to drive a business outcome. As AI enables companies to reach unprecedented levels
of scale, scope, and learning speed, organizations around the world are eager to participate in this
AI transformation. However, the rise of AI is posing new challenges for organizations to understand
how it works, when it is the most powerful, and how to optimize their AI strategies.
AI has created new business opportunities and delivered value to organizations in numerous ways.
For example, a chatbot is an AI application that can automate basic, repeatable, standardized
interactions between customers and sellers. Specically, chatbots such as IKEA's Anna use voice
or texts to automate communications and create personalized customer experiences. The chatbot
market size is predicted to expand from $250 million in 2017 to $1.34 billion in 2024 (Pise, 2018),
and the adoption of chatbot feature is predicted to save businesses $11 billion annually by 2023
(Hampshire, 2018).
AI has also been applied to automate procurement tasks and assist strategic sourcing in businessto-
business (B2B) markets, which is referred to as cognitive procurement (Loo and Santhiram,
2018). Surveys reveal that 60% of companies use AI to automate the request-for-quotation process
and 50% of companies use AI to recommend new suppliers (Tata Consultancy Services, 2016).
There are two ways in which AI can be used for smarter sourcing in procurement. The rst is
the automation [...] For example, AI-powered [...] bots [...] The second|and more important|
use relates to AI-powered tools helping to rapidly collect, present and even analyse commodity,
market, and supply intelligence to inform market strategies.
|Nicholas Walden, Senior Director at The Hackett Group (HICX Solutions, 2018).
On one hand, chatbots have been used to automate the request-for-quotation process in procurement
by mimicking human interactions, thereby relieving workers from tedious and repeatable
tasks. For example, SAP Ariba|an information technology services company in the US|utilizes
a procurement AI assistant to request price quotations and draft contracts. Chatbots have been
shown to reduce labor costs by 39% for a global energy company by automating procurement
processes (Papa et al., 2019). On the other hand, procurement managers can also utilize AI to
identify potential suppliers, which is referred to as AI recommendation. Traditionally, procurement
companies often identify potential suppliers based on their colleagues' recommendation, which
is referred to as human recommendation. AI adds the component of smartness to procurement
manager's supplier selection decisions by using its extraordinary capability to collect and analyze
market information. To summarize, in the procurement context, automation helps buyers automatically
inquire about prices instead of asking in person, and smartness aids buyers by using an
AI algorithm to recommend suppliers.

3
Given that procurement is the core decision in B2B businesses, it is critical to study how AI
creates and delivers value along its automation and smartness capabilities. We investigate how
buyers' AI strategies aect suppliers' wholesale pricing decisions. Specically, we study the eect
of automation|that is, whether the buyer inquires about prices using an autonomous chatbot or
in person. We also study the eect of smartness|that is, whether the buyer signals the use of AI
recommendations in selecting suppliers.
In this study, we run a eld experiment by collaborating with a trading company that operates
on Alibaba's trading platform 1688 (1688.com), which is the largest domestic trading platform
in China. It serves millions of buyers and suppliers who use an integrated chat program called
Aliwangwang to communicate with each other. The trading company's procurement managers
are required to quote prices from suppliers on 1688. We design a 3  3 eld experiment. The
procurement representatives are (1) a female human, (2) a male human, or (3) a chatbot, where the
chatbot automatically sends inquiry messages without human involvement. The quoting messages
indicate that the supplier is (1) not informed of any recommendation, (2) recommended by a
peer, or (3) recommended by an AI algorithm. We test the eect of automation and smartness in
procurement by comparing suppliers' wholesale price quotes across the aforementioned three buyer
types and three recommendation conditions.
We nd that when automation is not equipped with a smart control, it negatively aects the
quoted wholesale price. Specically, chatbot buyers receive a higher price quote than human buyers.
This is because a supplier might believe that a chatbot buyer lacks the expertise in product specics,
and in turn, has a higher reservation price and a higher willingness to pay than human buyers.
Moreover, a supplier does not have to lower his wholesale price in order to develop a professional
relationship with a chatbot buyer. Consequently, the supplier prices discriminate against chatbot
buyers. In addition, as a side nding, our results reveal that the wholesale prices quoted to male
and female buyers are not signicantly dierent.
We nd that signaling the use of AI algorithms in selecting the supplier reduces the wholesale
price for chatbot buyers, but it cannot reduce the price for human buyers. This is because, for chatbot
buyers, suppliers believe in AI's capability to collect and learn from market information and in
AI's complete in
uence on chatbot buyers' decisions, thereby changing their perception of chatbot
buyers' reservation price and willingness to pay. However, human buyers are not machines. They
are susceptible to their own judgment and heuristics, thereby making them reluctant to strictly follow
algorithm-suggested decisions (Cui et al., 2015; Dietvorst et al., 2018; Ibanez et al., 2018; Sun
et al., 2020; Tan and Staats, 2020). Due to such decision deviations, suppliers may perceive that
human buyers do not follow AI's recommendations, thereby ignoring these buyers' use of AI and

4
not altering the wholesale price accordingly. In contrast, we nd that the traditional recommendation
without smart controls|that is, human recommendation|cannot reduce the price quotes for
either chatbot buyers or human buyers. This allows us to tease out the eect of recommendation
and attribute the overall eect of AI recommendation to the eect of smartness.
In summary, in the absence of smart controls, the buyer suers from automation by receiving
a higher wholesale price, whereas having smart controls leads to a lower wholesale price for these
autonomous buyers. This implies that when automation is implemented without smart controls, it
is not very valuable, which suggests that building smartness is necessary before implementing high
levels of autonomy.
Last, we study the combined value of automation and smartness. We nd that chatbot buyers
aided by a smart recommendation system receive the lowest price quote among all conditions. In
other words, AI delivers the most value when buyers use both automation and recommendation
in price inquiry. This nding highlights the value of using autonomous agents aided by a smart
recommendation system in procurement.
2. Literature Review
AI Automation and Recommendation. Prior research indicates that automation creates value
in inventory replenishment (Van Donselaar et al., 2010) and nancial services (Acimovic et al.,
2020; Kohler et al., 2011; Luo et al., 2019). An application of automation is a chatbot, which helps
human workers automate communications with consumers. Extant literature reveals that consumers
often dislike communicating with a chatbot, despite the fact that automation can improve
agents' productivity. We complement this literature by investigating suppliers' reactions to the
procurement managers' usage of chatbot.
Prior research has also shown that AI's recommendations add value in various contexts, such as
disease diagnosis (Leachman and Merlino, 2017), wholesale pricing (Karlinsky-Shichor and Netzer,
2019), and product recommendations (Haubl and Trifts, 2000). For example, Karlinsky-Shichor
and Netzer (2019) create an AI version of B2B salespersons' pricing decisions that mimics their past
pricing behavior, which improves prots by 10%. However, human decision-makers often choose to
rely on their own judgment, making them reluctant to strictly follow algorithm-instructed decisions.
Such decision deviation behavior has been widely documented in the literature. For example,
managers tend to use their own demand forecasts rather than forecasts provided by machines (Cui
et al., 2015; Dietvorst et al., 2018); doctors prioritize tasks in a manner that deviates from system
recommendations (Ibanez et al., 2018); workers pack orders in boxes larger than the size suggested
by the system (Sun et al., 2020); and restaurant managers deviate from the routing rules that they
are instructed to follow (Tan and Staats, 2020). We add to this literature by studying suppliers'
reactions when B2B buyers tell them that they (the suppliers) are recommended by AI algorithms.

5
Our paper is closely related to Boute and Van Mieghem (2020). The authors propose a framework
that synthesizes automation and smartness for companies who transform operations digitally.
They argue that having a smart control is necessary before high levels of autonomy are considered.
Our paper follows this framework to study the value and synergies between automation and
smartness in procurement processes. Our ndings echo Boute and Van Mieghem's insights in that
we empirically show that automation, when implemented without smart controls, does not bring
value and can even backre, whereas smartness is valuable. Specically, we nd that automation
causes suppliers to increase their wholesale prices, but AI recommendations can eectively lower
the price quotes. Consequently, AI delivers the most value when automation and smartness are
adopted in combination with each other.
Procurement and Wholesale Pricing. Procurement is a critical business decision. The literature
has studied various mechanisms, such as inventory investment (Jain et al., 2014), information
provision (Engelbrecht-Wiggans and Katok, 2008), timing of auctions (Bimpikis et al., 2020), and
trust (Fugger et al., 2019) to improve procurement eectiveness. We follow suit to study the integration
of AI as a market mechanism to aect request-for-quotation outcomes.
The procurement outcome that we measure is the wholesale price charged by sellers. Wholesale
pricing is one of the central topics of supply chain management (Cachon, 2003; Cachon and Netessine,
2006). In supply chains, the wholesale price that suppliers charge for downstream buyers is
an important determinant of suppliers' prot margins and buyers' prices, which in turn aects
protability. A supplier may charge dierent wholesale prices to retailers based on, for example,
buyer intermediation (Tunca and Zhu, 2018), supplier{buyer relationships (Zhang et al., 2014), or
buyers' race (Cui et al., 2020). We contribute to the literature by studying whether suppliers price
against or in favor of chatbot buyers and, if so, which features of AI allow it to deliver the most
value.
3. Research Hypotheses
We study how suppliers vary their wholesale prices to buyers with and without the use of AI on
an online B2B platform. Before purchasing a product, buyers research its market price by asking
for price quotes from suppliers. Suppliers then provide a price quote to buyers based on buyers'
characteristics and the inquiry message. In this section, we develop a framework that predicts the
eect of automation and smartness in procurement. We discuss whether suppliers price against
or in favor of (1) buyers' autonomous characteristic|whether the buyer is a chatbot or human,
(2) buyers' smartness characteristic|whether the buyer signals the use of AI recommendations in
selecting suppliers, and (3) buyers' autonomous and smartness characteristics|whether the buyer
is a chatbot with a smart control or a human without a smart control.

6
3.1. Eect of Automation
When deciding on a wholesale price to charge buyers in a B2B setting, a supplier's most pivotal
consideration is the buyer's best alternative to a negotiated agreement (BATNA). BATNA refers
to the most advantageous alternative action that the buyer can take if the negotiation reaches an
impasse (Fisher and Ury, 1981; Fisher et al., 2011; Pinkley et al., 1994). Consequently, the buyers'
BATNA determines the suppliers' pricing strategy: buyers with a stronger BATNA have better
outside options, and in turn, they have a lower reservation price and a lower willingness to pay
(Korobkin, 2014), which results in a lower wholesale price charged by suppliers.
We consider the scenario that the chatbot or human buyer asks for prices without providing
any recommendation information to the supplier, i.e., automation without smartness. Autonomous
chatbots are an eective tool to automate repeated inquiries and preprogrammed responses. In
our research context, a chatbot is used to automatically send inquiry messages to a group of suppliers,
saving buyers' time spent in sending messages to each supplier personally. However, these
traditional chatbots, when their main objective is to repeat tasks without smart controls, are not
equipped to address the complex requirements of B2B suppliers, who expect in-depth communications
and negotiations with buyers (Swanson, 2015). We interviewed several highly experienced
trading managers who conrm that procurement requires a signicant level of professional knowledge
in product specics, such as product materials, size, functionality, and after-sales service,
which preprogrammed chatbots might be less knowledgeable in.1 Consequently, suppliers may
believe that chatbots lack expertise in product specics and, in turn, have a worse BATNA and
thus a higher reservation price than human buyers.
Further, because chatbots lack personal feelings and empathy, suppliers do not need to lower
the wholesale price in order to develop a serious relationship with chatbot buyers (Dietvorst et al.,
2018; Luo et al., 2019). Therefore, we expect that without smart controls, chatbot buyers will be
price discriminated against and receive a higher price quote than human buyers.
Hypothesis 1 (Automation). Without smart controls, chatbot buyers receive a higher whole-
sale price quote than human buyers.
3.2. Eect of Smartness
In this section, we study the eect of having smartness in the process of wholesale price inquiries.
Smartness means that the buyer uses AI recommendations to select suppliers. Without claiming
the use of AI recommendations, suppliers would not be able to know and react to this. Therefore,
in our research context, smartness is signaled to the suppliers. Specically, when asking for a price
quote, the buyer tells the supplier that the company was recommended to the buyer by AI's market
1We discuss our interviews in detail in Section 5.1.

7
search and data analysis. The supplier can use this information to update beliefs about the buyer
and alter the oered wholesale price accordingly.
The information on the use of AI recommendations can be a key determinant for suppliers,
because AI has an extraordinary capability to collect and learn from market information (Haubl
and Trifts, 2000). Knowing that the buyer has comprehensive knowledge of the market aided by AI,
the supplier would believe that the buyer has a stronger BATNA|i.e., a better walk-away option|
and in turn would consider lowering the price. In addition to the capability of AI, suppliers would
also evaluate whether the AI recommendations have a complete in
uence on buyers' decisions. If
a buyer does not follow AI-generated recommendations, then the buyer's decisions will not heavily
rely on AI, which suggests that the supplier could ignore the buyer's AI usage.
We rst consider the scenario where the procurement manager uses autonomous chatbots to
ask for prices and signal that the supplier was selected by AI's market search. Because chatbots
are machines programmed to follow the AI's recommendations, the supplier would believe in the
thorough knowledge of the market gained by AI and the in
uence that AI has on the buyer.
Therefore, we expect that chatbot buyers' use of AI recommendations will improve the supplier's
perception of their BATNA, thereby reducing the supplier's wholesale price.
Next, we consider the scenario where the human buyer asks for prices in person and informs the
supplier that the company was recommended by AI. Humans are not machines. They are susceptible
to their own judgment and heuristics, thereby making them reluctant to strictly follow algorithms
and rules. This is known as decision deviation (Cui et al., 2015; Dietvorst et al., 2018; Ibanez et al.,
2018; Sun et al., 2020; Tan and Staats, 2020). Such deviation behavior from algorithm-instructed
decisions has been widely documented in the literature. For example, managers are shown to use
human forecasts rather than algorithmic forecasts (Cui et al., 2015; Deloitte, 2018); doctors are
shown to prioritize tasks in a manner that deviates from system recommendations (Ibanez et al.,
2018); workers are shown to pack orders in boxes larger than the system-recommended size (Sun
et al., 2020); and restaurant managers are shown to deviate from the routing rules that machines
instruct them to follow (Tan and Staats, 2020). Given this widespread recognition that humans
often deviate from algorithmic recommendations, we expect that suppliers would anticipate human
buyers to not strictly follow AI recommendations.
To further conrm that decision deviations exist in procurement, we interviewed nine professional
B2B suppliers with an average of 12 years' trading experience. In the interviews, we asked them to
share whether they believe in AI recommendations' in
uence on a human buyer or a chatbot buyer.
We summarize their quotes in Table 8 in the appendix. Most suppliers indicate that they believe
that such an AI recommendation can help chatbot buyers learn about market knowledge and can
dictate their sourcing choices. However, eight out of nine suppliers do not believe that a human

8
buyer will follow AI recommendations because they think that human buyers would make their
own judgment about the market and are likely to deviate from algorithms. Therefore, we expect
that suppliers would assume that human buyers do not follow the AI's recommendations, thereby
ignoring buyers' usage of AI and not altering their perception on the human buyers' BATNA. In
other words, the use of AI becomes ineective in reducing the wholesale price quote for human
buyers.
Hypothesis 2 (Smartness). (a) Chatbot buyers, when informing suppliers that they are
selected by smart AI algorithms, receive a lower wholesale price quote than chatbot buyers without
AI recommendations. (b) Human buyers, when informing suppliers that they are selected by smart
AI algorithms, receive a similar wholesale price quote as human buyers without AI recommenda-
tions.
3.3. Automation and Smartness
In this section, we study the eect of having both automation and smartness. We rst discuss the
eect of automation under smart controls. That is, we compare the dierence between chatbot
buyers with AI recommendations and human buyers with AI recommendations. When both human
and chatbots are equipped with AI recommendations, the eect boils down to who would follow
the AI's recommendations. According to Hypothesis 2(a), chatbots are programmed to follow the
AI's recommendations. And according to Hypothesis 2(b), human buyers may not fully follow the
AI's recommendations due to their tendency to deviate from AI-instructed decisions. Therefore,
suppliers will react to chatbot buyers' and ignore human buyers' usage of AI recommendations.
Taken together, when equipped with a smart control, suppliers would perceive that chatbot buyers
have more comprehensive market knowledge, thereby a stronger BATNA with a lower reservation
price than human buyers. We hypothesize this relation in Hypothesis 3(a).
Next, we study the dierence between chatbot buyers with AI recommendations and human
buyers without any recommendation. According to the above theories, AI enables buyers to have
comprehensive knowledge about the market and exerts a full in
uence on chatbot buyers. As a
result, suppliers would perceive chatbot buyers with smartness to have a stronger BATNA and
thus would oer them a lower wholesale price than human buyers without smartness. Therefore,
we expect that the eect of AI is the strongest when both automation and smartness are in place.
Hypothesis 3 (Automation and Smartness). (a) When informing suppliers that they are
selected by smart AI algorithms, chatbot buyers receive a lower wholesale price quote than human
buyers. (b) Chatbot buyers, when informing suppliers that they are selected by smart AI algorithms,
receive a lower wholesale price quote than human buyers without AI recommendations.


Figure 1: Framework of Automation and Smartness in Procurement
Human Buyer
Automated
Smart
+
=
H2 (b)
H1
H2 (a)
Automated
Smart
Smart
Automated
_
_
H3 (b)
_ H3 (a)
Notes. +, 􀀀, and = represent higher, lower, and similar price quotes, respectively. H1{H3 represent Hypotheses 1{3,
respectively.
We summarize the eect of automation and smartness on suppliers' price decisions in Figure 1.
We follow Boute and Van Mieghem's (2020) framework to classify buyers' AI strategies into four
groups: human buyer without the help of AI, automation enabled by chatbot buyers, smart control
enabled by AI recommendations, and the joint application of automation and smartness. In this
framework, Hypothesis 1 describes the pure eect of automation when we move from the \Human
Buyer" zone to the \Automated" zone; Hypothesis 2 describes the eect of smartness on human
buyers and chatbot buyers separately when we move from the \Human Buyer" zone to the \Smart"
zone, and from the \Automated" zone to the \Automated+Smart" zone, respectively; Hypothesis 3
describes the eect of automation under smartness when we move from the \Smart" zone to the
\Automated+Smart" zone and the joint eect of automation and smartness when we move from
the \Human Buyer" zone to the \Automated+Smart" zone.
4. Research Context
Alibaba Group launched 1688 in 1999, which is the largest domestic online B2B platform in China
(Alibaba, 2020a). This platform connects 30 million enterprise buyers and suppliers (China Daily,
2019); the suppliers provide products in 49 major categories, including apparel, general merchandise,
electronics, and car accessories (CNXtrans, 2020). The 1688 platform has a built-in instant
chat program called Aliwangwang that enables buyers to contact suppliers for product specics and
prices. Buying companies are permitted to embed autonomous chatbot features in Aliwangwang
in order to automate communications.
On 1688, a supplier introduces company information on a prole page and lists product information
on a product page. Figure 4 in the appendix illustrates an example of a supplier's prole and
product pages. The supplier's prole page displays basic company information (e.g., name, location,
membership status, and credibility) and trading performance on the platform (e.g., number of

peat purchase rate, and refund rate). Suppliers can pay to have
an elite membership in order to obtain advantages in product promotion and exposure. A supplier's
credibility has ve levels. The product page displays product characteristics|for example,
description, picture, price, and options|and transaction details|for example, number of reviews,
review rating, and transaction volume in the past 30 days.
A buyer also has a personal prole that includes the buyer's name, gender, date of birth, location,
photo, phone number, and email address. Buyers can search for a specic product and choose one
from a list of suppliers displayed by the platform. The buyer can then view the supplier's prole
and product details, as depicted in Figure 4. The buyer sends a price quote to the supplier on
Aliwangwang either through a personal message or using autonomous chatbots to automate the
inquiry process. After receiving an inquiry from a buyer, the supplier chooses whether to follow
up and how much to quote. After transaction details are settled, the buyer makes a payment, the
supplier ships the order, and the transaction is completed.
5. Identication Design
We aim to study the eect of the buyer's usage of automation and smartness on the suppliers'
price quoting strategy. We collaborate with a trading company that operates on 1688 to conduct
a eld experiment.
5.1. Study Design
In order to study the eect of automation, we design the sender who asks for the price quote to be a
female human, a male human, or an autonomous chatbot. We identify the value of pure automation
by comparing the price quote received by a chatbot buyer and a human buyer. In order to study the
eect of smartness, we design the sender to signal that the supplier is recommended by AI or human
peers, or to not signal any recommendation at all. We identify the value of AI recommendations by
comparing the price quote received with AI recommendations and without any recommendation.
We also introduce a treatment with human recommendations, in which the buyer signals that
the supplier was recommended by a (human) peer, in order to disentangle the pure impact of
having recommendations and the pure impact of having smart controls. If the eect of human
recommendations is weak, we can attribute the overall eect of AI recommendations to smartness.
Consequently, we employ a 33 experiment design by considering three types of buyers (female
buyer, male buyer, and chatbot buyer) and three recommendation conditions (no recommendation,
human recommendation, and AI recommendation). We outline how our experiment design matches
our AI framework in Figure 6 in the appendix.
The company has multiple procurement representatives whose routine job is to keep track of
market dynamics by collecting wholesale price information. The company also uses chatbots to


 suppliers. The trading company asks for price quotes via three
buying representatives: a female buyer, a male buyer, and a chatbot buyer. We tailor the messages
to incorporate dierent recommendation conditions. Thereafter, we record and compare suppliers'
responses. Table 1 summarizes the study design.
Table 1: Field Experiment Design
Design
Automation  Recommendation Condition
No Recommendation Human Recommendation AI Recommendation
Chatbot Female Male Chatbot Female Male Chatbot Female Male
Planned Sample Size 440 440 440 440 440 440 440 440 440
Actual Sample Size 440 439 437 435 436 439 440 439 439
Notes. The planned sample size was 3,960|that is, 440 suppliers per treatment arm. The actual sample size is 3,944 after
excluding unavailable listings.
We select a sample of 3,960 products from 3,960 suppliers in the car accessories sector.2 This
sector, which is the backbone of China's industrial ascent (Hong and Einhorn, 2018), has a large
number of suppliers on 1688. Car-related products have also been studied to test price discrimination
behavior in previous literature (Busse et al., 2017). In our sample, there are 14 product
subcategories including, for example, automobile data recorders, car cameras, car MP3, vehicle
displays, vehicle bluetooth headsets, vehicle bluetooth speakers, vehicle-mounted mobile holders,
vehicle chargers, vehicle lockers, car vacuum cleaners, GPS locators, vehicle air puriers, vehicle
refrigerators, and vehicle-mounted inverters.3 Each supplier usually sells a wide selection of products
(e.g., a vehicle refrigerator in capacities of 6, 12, or 20 liters). From each supplier's listed
products, we select a product model that is the most common and standard in the market. Suppliers
are randomly assigned to one of the nine (33) treatment arms. Consequently, we obtain
1,320 suppliers per buyer type, 1,320 suppliers per recommendation condition, and 440 suppliers
per treatment arm. This means that each supplier is quoted only once.
Note that all of our studied products are commodity products. Relative to non-commodities
which are custom and unique, commodities are standard and basic goods. One might question that
whether procuring standard commodities requires buyers to have extensive expertise in product
2 The sample size is determined by the statistics power calculation. By running a pilot experiment with 40 chatbot
buyers, 40 female buyers, and 40 male buyers under the no recommendation, human recommendation, and AI recom-
mendation conditions, respectively, we compare the price discounts across treatment arms and obtain their eect size.
Based on a two-sided t-test with a power level of 0.8 and a signicance level of 0.05, we require 99 observations with
a 0.40 eect size between chatbot and female buyers under the \no recommendation" condition, 38 observations with
a 0.65 eect size between chatbot and male buyers under the \no recommendation" condition, 393 observations with
a 0.20 eect size between the \no recommendation" and \human recommendation" conditions, and 164 observations
with a 0.31 eect size between the \no recommendation" and \AI recommendation" conditions. We determined the
sample size per treatment arm to be 440 (>393) to further ensure the validity of the experiment.
3 In order to explore new markets, the trading company species these 14 product categories from which our research
team independently selects the supplier and product sample. We validate with the company that there is no previous
supplier in the sample.

ral highly experienced trading managers conrm that buying
commodity products also requires signicant professional knowledge such as product materials,
size, functionality, and after-sales service, which enables suppliers to exert in-depth communications
and negotiations. Their exact interview quotes are summarized in Table 9 in the appendix. On
the other hand, when procuring non-commodity products, chatbots might be less knowledgeable
in product specics due to their uniqueness. Therefore, the estimated eect of automation for
non-commodities products might be larger than the eect identied in our study.
In order to ensure that suppliers are randomly assigned to treatment arms, we conduct a randomization
check across the following supplier characteristics: (1) membership status (i.e., the number
of years that the supplier has been an elite member), (2) credibility (i.e., the supplier's credibility
based on the Alibaba credit system), (3) number of transactions in the past 90 days, (4) number
of buyers in the past 90 days, (5) repeat purchase rate in the past 90 days, (6) refund rate in the
past 90 days, (7) listed price of the selected product, (8) trading volume of the selected product
in the past 30 days; (9) number of reviews for the selected product, and (10) review rating for the
selected product. Table 2 presents the summary statistics of these variables. Further, the p-values
in Table 3 are all larger than 0.05, which ensures the randomized assignment.
5.2. Study Procedure
Buyers' characteristics (male, female, or chatbot) are signaled by their names and prole pictures.4
The buyers sent price inquiries to the selected suppliers during the period December 18, 2019,
to January 20, 2020.5 Each message asks for a price quote per unit for 1,000 units of the preselected
product. The message content varies based on the recommendation conditions. In the \no
recommendation" condition, the buyer includes the most basic information in the inquiry message
without indicating any human or AI recommendation. In particular, all buyers in this condition sent
a message that said, \Hello, I am [a procurement manager or a chatbot buyer]. We are interested
in your product: [the specic product name and link of this product]. Could you please quote
us your best price per piece for an order of 1,000 units?" The AI chatbot buyers disclose their
machine identity in order to comply with China's regulation regarding AI (Laskai and Webster,
2019). Quoting a price including the packaging fee is the industry norm. In order to ensure that the
quoted prices are not confounded by the value-added tax or shipping fee, the buyers ask suppliers
4 The chatbot buyer has a standard robotic prole picture. We edit the photos of human buyers using Photoshop to
ensure their photos have a similar attractiveness.
5 Our experiment (which was from December 18, 2019, to January 20, 2020) was conducted before the outbreak of
COVID-19 (which caused the rst lockdown measure to take place on January 23, 2020) and before the Chinese New
Year (which was from January 24, 2020, to January 30, 2020). As a result, our experiment was not aected by the
pandemic or the holiday.




Notes. \No. of Trans." indicates the numbers of transactions. C, F, and M represent chatbot buyer, female buyer, and male
buyer, respectively. N, H, and A represent no recommendation, human recommendation, and AI recommendation, respectively.
to quote a price excluding these fees. The original inquiry messages in the eld experiment are in
Chinese and are carefully translated and presented in Figure 5 in the appendix.

ition, the buyer discloses that the supplier is recommended
 recommended to us by a peer." We follow the common
practice and the industry norm to not include the peers' name in the inquiry message.6 In the \AI
recommendation" condition, the buyer reveals that the supplier is recommended by AI's market
search and data analysis: \Your company was recommended to us by an AI system's market
information collection and data processing."
Within a week after the inquiry, we record and compare the initial price quotes.7 We received
1,807 responses that included a price quote from the 3,944 suppliers that we sent messages to.
6. Results
In this section, we study the eect of automation and smartness on suppliers' price quoting strategy.
We examine the eect of automation in Section 6.1, the eect of smartness in Section 6.2, and the
joint eect of automation and smartness in Section 6.3.
6.1. Eect of Automation
In a B2B setting, it is an industry norm and a common practice that suppliers privately quote a
lower price than their publicly listed prices (Cui et al., 2020). In order to conduct a fair comparison
of the amount of price discount oered by suppliers, we follow previous literature (Cui et al., 2020)
to compare the price discount percentage relative to the listed price:
Discount=100%

Listed Price􀀀Supplier's Quoted Price
Listed Price

: (1)
Automation without Smartness. We rst focus on the \no recommendation" condition and
investigate the eect of automation on suppliers' price quoting strategy. Panel A of Table 10 in
the appendix presents the summary statistics of the suppliers' price discounts for chatbot, female,
and male buyers. Figure 2 presents a visual illustration. In particular, chatbot, female, and male
buyers receive an average price discount of 18.01%, 19.15%, and 20.96%, respectively|that is, both
female and male buyers receive a lower price quote than chatbot buyers. Moreover, the dierence
of the price discount between male and chatbot buyers is statistically signicant (p-value =0:07).
6 In our \human recommendation" message design, a buyer does not provide the name of the peer who recommended
the supplier, and it has been validated that such a design format conforms to norms regarding both condentiality
and industry practice (Cui et al., 2020).
7 Following the literature (Ayres and Siegelman, 1995; Busse et al., 2017; Cui et al., 2020), our study focuses on the
initial price quote because (1) the initial price quote re
ects the supplier's perception of the buyer's willingness to
pay; (2) suppliers could easily lose customers to competitors if they do not oer an attractive initial price in an online
trading platform; and (3) the initial price quote, unlike a second price quote or price concession, is not confounded
by any bargaining or negotiation techniques.



ble that represents whether a buyer is a chatbot, female, or male;
Controlsi is a vector of control variables regarding supplier characteristics, including membership
status, number of transactions, listed price, repeat purchase rate, and number of reviews.
Figure 2: Eect of Automation and Smartness
18.01
19.15
20.96
19.36
17.39
19.46
18.01 18.28
22.57
18.76
21.04 20.65
16
18
20
22
24
Chatbot Female Male All Data
Discount (%)
Buyers' Type
No Recommendation Human Recommendation AI Recommendation
The estimation results are presented in the rst column of Table 4, where the omitted buyers'
type is the chatbot group. The coecients of Female (Male) represent the additional price
discounts oered to female (male) buyers relative to chatbot buyers. The coecient of Male is
weakly positively signicant (p-value < 0:1), which implies that the supplier quotes a signicantly
lower wholesale price to human|particularly male|buyers than chatbot buyers, which weakly
supports Hypothesis 1. Note that we conduct several analyses in order to conrm the robustness
of this coecient: a combined regression with all the observations in Section 7.1 and an analysis
with time xed eects in Section 7.2. All these analyses support Hypothesis 1. In other words, the
implementation of pure automation does not help buyers and can even backre in a procurement
setting. This is because a chatbot buyer, due to its autonomous and unsmart nature, signals a
higher willingness to pay than human buyers, and human suppliers are less interested in building
a professional relationship with a chatbot buyer.
Automation under Smartness. Next, we discuss the eect of automation on suppliers' pricing
strategy in the presence of smartness. Panel C of Table 10 in the appendix presents the summary
statistics of the suppliers' price discounts for chatbot, female, and male buyers under the \AI
recommendation" condition. In particular, chatbot, female, and male buyers, when equipped with
smart recommendations, receive a price discount of 22.57%, 18.76%, and 21.04%, respectively. The

having automation and smartness) and human buyers (only
 4. We can see that chatbot buyers receive a signicantly lower
er words, automation is helpful in the presence of smartness.
This nding echoes the conjecture of Boute and Van Mieghem (2020): in the presence of smart
controls, it is conceivable that trust in the algorithm increases and risk is contained, which opens
up the possibility of higher levels of autonomy.
Automation under Human Recommendation. In addition, from column II of Table 4, we can
observe that under the \human recommendation" condition, the coecient of Female is weakly
positively signicant (p-value < 0:1), which implies that the supplier quotes a signicantly lower
wholesale price to human|particularly female|buyers than chatbot buyers. In other words, the
implementation of automation still results in a higher price even when human recommendations are
adopted. This highlights the importance of having smart controls when implementing automation
in a procurement setting.
Table 4: Eect of Automation on Price Quote
Dependent Variable: Discount
No Recommendation
I
Human Recommendation
II
AI Recommendation
III
All Data
IV
Male 0.028
(0.016)
0.009
(0.014)
-0.015
(0.016)
0.009
(0.009)
Female 0.010
(0.016)
0.026
(0.014)
-0.037
(0.016)
0.004
(0.009)
Supplier Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 595 665 547 1,807
R2 0.047 0.054 0.031 0.033
Notes. This table tests the eect of automation on the price discount for four dierent samples. Results from columns I{
III are based on the sample under the \no recommendation" condition, under the \human recommendation" condition,
and under the \AI recommendation" condition, respectively. Results from column IV are based on the full sample.
p <0:1; p <0:05.
Gender. A natural extension that we can study is whether suppliers price discriminate based
on buyers' gender. Table 10 in the appendix and Figure 2 summarize the price discounts for
female and male buyers under dierent recommendation conditions. In the \no recommendation"
condition, we nd that female and male buyers receive an average price discount of 19.15% and
20.96%, respectively; there is no statistically signicant dierence between male and female buyers
(p-value=0:26). This result also holds under the \human recommendation" condition and the \AI
recommendation" condition. We also formally test the price dierence based on buyers' gender,
Discounti =+Genderi +
Controlsi +i; (3)

17
re presented in Table 5, where the omitted variable is Female;
nicant.

No Recommendation
I
Human Recommendation
II
AI Recommendation
III
All Data
IV
Male 0.020
(0.016)
-0.017
(0.014)
0.022
(0.015)
0.006
(0.009)
Supplier Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 410 453 395 1,258
R2 0.046 0.040 0.045 0.033
Notes. This table tests the eect of gender on the price discount for four dierent samples. Results from columns I{III
are based on the sample under the \no recommendation" condition, under the \human recommendation" condition,
and under the \AI recommendation" condition, respectively. Results from column IV are based on the full sample.
We show that there is no gender discrimination in the B2B procurement context. This result differs
from the ndings in the business-to-consumer (B2C) settings|that female consumers receive
a higher price than male consumers because they are perceived to be less knowledgeable (Busse
et al., 2017; Mejia and Parker, 2019). Unlike B2C consumers whose purchasing decisions are often
emotional and irrational, B2B buyers are professional procurement managers whose job is to negotiate
with suppliers. Consequently, male and female procurement managers are perceived to have
a similar willingness to pay (Goldberg, 2018).
6.2. Eect of Smartness
AI recommendation. We investigate how AI recommendation aects suppliers' price quoting
strategy for chatbot, female, and male buyers, respectively. Table 11 in the appendix summarizes
the suppliers' price discounts for chatbot, female, and male buyers. Figure 2 presents an
illustration. In particular, for chatbot buyers, the average price discount is 18.01% under the \no
recommendation" condition and 22.57% under the \AI recommendation" condition, respectively.
This implies that, compared to the \no recommendation" condition, AI recommendation signi-
cantly reduces the wholesale price quoted for chatbot buyers (p-value = 0:01). For female (male)
buyers, the average price discount is 19.15% (20.96%) under the \no recommendation" condition
and 18.76% (21.04%) under the \AI recommendation" condition, respectively. This implies that,
compared to the \no recommendation" condition, AI recommendation cannot reduce the wholesale
price quoted for female or male buyers.
We also formally examine the impact of recommendation conditions on price discounts,
Discounti =+Conditioni +
Controlsi +i; (4)

18
where Conditioni is a binary variable that represents the \no recommendation" condition or \AI
" condition.


Female
II
Male
III
All Data
IV
AI Recommendation 0.042
(0.017)
-0.003
(0.015)
0.000
(0.015)
0.012
(0.009)
Supplier Controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 337 421 384 1,142
R2 0.040 0.032 0.058 0.033
Notes. This table tests the eect of smartness on price discounts for four dierent samples. Results from columns
I{III are based on the sample of chatbot, female, and male buyers, respectively. Results from column IV are based
on the full sample. p <0:05.
The coecient of AI Recommendation represents the additional price discount that a buyer can
obtain when signaling that the supplier is recommended by an AI algorithm, compared to the
\no recommendation" condition. The coecient of AI Recommendation is signicant and positive
(p-value < 0:05) for a chatbot buyer, but not signicant for female or male buyers. These results
conrm that a smart recommendation is eective for lowering prices for chatbot buyers but not
for human buyers, thereby supporting Hypothesis 2. Because of AI's ability to search and learn
about market information, suppliers believe that chatbot buyers have a lower reservation price and
a lower willingness to pay, and therefore reduce their wholesale price. However, human buyers are
deemed to not fully follow algorithms' recommendations and would not be able to benet from
claiming the use of AI recommendations.
In summary, having a purely autonomous process leads to a higher wholesale price, putting
buyers in a disadvantageous position, whereas having a smart control leads to a lower wholesale
price. In other words, automation is not very valuable when implemented without smart controls,
which suggests that building smartness is necessary before high levels of autonomy are to be
considered.
Human Recommendation. Recall that we introduced a treatment with human recommendation
in order to disentangle the pure impact of having any recommendation at all and the pure impact
of having smart controls. Next, we study this human recommendation eect. If this eect is weak,
then we can conclude that the eect of AI recommendation stems from having smart controls.
Table 11 in the appendix and Figure 2 indicate that the average price discount for chatbot buyers
is 18.01% under the \no recommendation" condition and 17.39% under the \human recommendation"
condition, respectively. We perform a t-test and nd that the dierence is insignicant
(p-value = 0:68). We nd a similar result for human buyers that human recommendations cannot

19
help human buyers lower the wholesale price received from suppliers. We conjecture that this is
driven by two reasons. First, due to humans' limitations in information processing (Payne, 1982;
often distrust buyers when they present soft social information
hanging suppliers' belief regarding buyers' willingness to pay and
their pricing strategy.
6.3. Joint Eect of Automation and Smartness
Thus far, we have demonstrated that automation brings a negative eect to buyers while smartness
brings a positive eect. Next, we study the joint value of automation and smartness. Table 12 in
the appendix summarizes the price discounts received with and without automation and smartness.
This table reveals that autonomous chatbot buyers, when informing suppliers that they are selected
by smart algorithms, receive a lower wholesale price quote than human (particularly female) buyers
without any recommendation (p-value =0:05). We also formally test this joint eect,
Discounti =+Jointi +
Controlsi +i; (5)
where Jointi is a categorical variable that represents a chatbot buyer aided by AI recommendations,
a female buyer without recommendations, or a male buyer without recommendations. The
estimation results are presented in Table 7, where the omitted variable is when a buyer is equipped
with both automation and smartness. Table 7 reveals that having both automation and smartness
can eectively reduce the price for (particularly female) buyers (p-value<0:05). This implies that
we should improve the levels of autonomy and smartness simultaneously.
Table 7: Joint Eect of Automation and Smartness on Price Quote
Dependent Variable: Discount
Male -0.014
(0.018)
Female -0.034
(0.017)
Supplier Controls Yes
Observations 562
R2 0.034
Notes. This table tests the joint eect of automation and smartness on price
discount. Results are based on the sample of chatbot buyers under AI recommen-
dation pooled with human buyers without recommendation. p <0:05.
We summarize the results of buyers' AI strategies in our framework in Figure 3. First, when a
buyer adopts pure automation but without smartness by moving from the \Human Buyer" zone
to the \Automated" zone, the buyer suers from automation by receiving a higher price. However,


Figure 3: Framework and Results of Automation and Smartness in Procurement
Human Buyer
Automated


Automated
Smart
Smart
Automated
_ _
Notes. +, 􀀀, and = represent higher, lower, and similar price quotes, respectively.
when the buyer adopts automation in the presence of smartness by moving from the \Smart" zone
to the \Automated+Smart" zone, the buyer benets from automation by receiving a lower price.
Second, when a human buyer is equipped with a smart algorithm by moving from the \Human
Buyer" zone to the \Smart" zone, smartness does not change the price. However, when a chatbot
buyer incorporates a smart recommendation system by moving from the \Automated" zone to
the \Automated+Smart" zone, smartness becomes helpful in reducing the price. Last, when the
buyer adopts both automation and smartness by moving from the \Human Buyer" zone to the
\Automated+Smart" zone, the buyer can also benet from receiving a lower price quote.
7. Robustness Check
In this section, we conduct additional analysis to check the robustness of our key insights regarding
the individual and joint eects of automation and smartness.
7.1. Combined Regression
In our main analysis, we studied the eect of automation and the eect of smartness separately.
We now combine all observations into a single regression:
Discounti =+0Typei +1Recommendationi
+2Typei Recommendationi +
Controlsi +i; (6)
where Recommendationi is a categorical variable that represents the \no recommendation" condition,
\human recommendation" condition, or \AI recommendation" condition.
Table 13 in the appendix reports the estimation results, where the omitted buyers' type is the
chatbot buyer and the omitted recommendation condition is the \no recommendation" condition.
This table shows three observations. First, the coecient of Male is weakly positively signicant
(p-value<0:1). That is, chatbot buyers receive a signicantly higher price quote than human buyers
without recommendations; this is consistent with our result on the eect of automation without

thesis 1. Second, the coecient of AI Recommendation is positively
signicant (p-value < 0:05). That is, AI recommendations help chatbot buyers receive a
lower price quote; this is consistent with our result on the eect of smartness on chatbot buyers,
thereby supporting Hypothesis 2(a). Third, the coecients of Male  Human Recommendation
 negatively signicant (p-value < 0:1). That
e discrimination; these results are consistent with
our main result on the eect of automation under smartness, thereby supporting Hypothesis 3(a).
7.2. Time Fixed Eects
We test our key results by including the time xed eects at two levels: the inquiries' request date
and the inquiries' quote date. Because dierent suppliers may take dierent amounts of time to
respond to a price inquiry, the quote dates for the same batch of inquiries might dier. To ensure
rigor and robustness, we test for both time xed eects.
The estimation results with time xed eects are shown in Tables 14 and 15 in the appendix. As
shown in column I of Panel A in Tables 14 and 15, the coecients of Male are positively signicant
(p-value<0:1), which implies that suppliers quote a signicantly lower wholesale price to human|
particularly male|buyers than chatbot buyers in the absence of smartness. However, column III
of Panel A in Tables 14 and 15 shows that the coecients of Female are negatively signicant
(p-value < 0:05), which implies that chatbot buyers receive a signicantly lower price quote than
(particularly female) buyers when smartness is adopted. This is consistent with our main results
regarding the eect of automation, thereby supporting Hypothesis 1 and Hypothesis 3(a).
As shown in Panel B of Tables 14 and 15, the coecients of AI recommendation are positively
signicant (p-value < 0:05) for a chatbot buyer, but not signicant for female or male buyers.
This is consistent with our main results regarding the eect of smartness, thereby supporting
Hypothesis 2(a) and Hypothesis 2(b).
As shown in Panel C of Tables 14 and 15, having both automation and smartness can eectively
reduce the price for (particularly female) buyers (p-value<0:05). This is consistent with our main
results regarding the joint eect of automation and smartness, thereby supporting Hypothesis 3(b).
7.3. Simulated AI Recommendation
In our design, the signal that the supplier is recommended by AI is randomly assigned to each
supplier. In practice, it may be true that only some (high-quality) suppliers would receive such
signals. In order to simulate such a scenario, we follow our collaborative company's guide to score
10 supplier/product characteristics (as shown in Section 5) according to how much they determine

22
 suppliers above the average score as high-quality suppliers
and the rest as low-quality suppliers. We then simulate an AI recommendation condition where
buyers equipped with AI recommendation only contact the high-quality suppliers. In this way, we
can simulate the situation where only high-quality suppliers are selected by AI algorithms and
tness in practice by comparing suppliers' wholesale prices
0.25 under the \no recommendation" condition, which is lower
than 0.31 under the \simulated AI recommendation" condition, conrming that only high-quality
suppliers are included in the sample.
Table 16 in the appendix summarizes the suppliers' price discounts for chatbot, female, and
male buyers under the \simulated AI recommendation" condition and the \no recommendation"
condition. In particular, for chatbot buyers, the average price discount is 18.01% without recommendations
and 23.91% with the simulated AI recommendation. This means that the simulated
AI recommendation signicantly reduces the wholesale price quoted for chatbot buyers (p-value=
0:01). However, consistent with our main result, the simulated AI recommendation cannot reduce
the wholesale price quoted for human buyers; for female (male) buyers, the average price discount
is 19.15% (20.96%) without AI recommendation and 18.76% (21.34%) with simulated AI
recommendation, respectively.
We also formally examine the impact of the \simulated AI recommendation" on price by
Discounti =+AIRecommendationi +
Controlsi +i; (7)
where AIRecommendationi is a binary variable that represents the \no recommendation" condition
or the \simulated AI recommendation" condition. The estimation results are presented in
Table 17 in the appendix, where the coecient of Simulated AI Recommendation is signicant (p-
value < 0:05) and positive for chatbot buyers, but not signicant for human buyers. These results
again conrm that a smart recommendation is eective in lowering prices for chatbot buyers but
not for human buyers.
7.4. Heterogeneous Treatment Eect
We next test whether any supplier or product characteristics (i.e., the number of transactions, listed
price, review rating, and trading volume) could change the eect of automation and smartness.
For the eect of automation, we use the following estimation:
Discounti =+1Typei +2Moderatori +3Moderatori Typei +
Controlsi +i; (8)

23
where 2 represents how a supplier or product characteristic moderates the eect of automation
on the wholesale price quotes. Moderatori represents the number of transactions for the supplier,
product's listed price, review rating, or trading volume. Controlsi includes all other control variables
except for the tested moderator. Table 18 in the appendix presents the estimation results.
For the eect of smartness, we use the estimation below. Table 19 in the appendix presents the
estimation results.
Discounti =+1Conditioni +2Moderatori
+3Moderatori Conditioni +
Controlsi +i: (9)
For the joint eect of automation and smartness, we use the estimation below. Table 20 in the
appendix presents the estimation results.
Discounti =+1Jointi +2Moderatori +3Moderatori Jointi +
Controlsi +i: (10)
Overall, none of the studied characteristics (except for the listed price) has an impact on the
individual and joint eects of automation and smartness. A higher listed price weakens the eectiveness
of smartness for chatbot buyers, probably because suppliers are more prudent when selling
expensive products and are less likely to regard AI-driven price quotations as a serious negotiation.
8. Conclusion
AI is transforming the very nature of procurement|how to operate and how to interact with
supply chain partners. According to the Roland Berger's survey on Fortune Global 500 companies,
67% of chief procurement managers rank AI among their top three priorities for the next 10 years
(Marlinghaus, 2018). Thus, we explore how a buyer's AI strategy would aect the wholesale price
received from suppliers. By designing and conducting a randomized eld experiment, we nd that
having a purely autonomous request-for-quotation process results in a higher price quote|that
is, suppliers price-discriminate a not-so-smart chatbot buyer. Further, we nd that introducing a
smart control|signaling that the supplier is recommended by a smart system|can reduce the
price quoted for chatbot buyers. Last, we show that automation and smartness can jointly reduce
the wholesale price quoted by suppliers, thereby highlighting the potential of a smart automation
in procurement.
Our study provides guidance for companies moving toward automating their standard and routine
processes, such as price requests and new supplier selection. In fact, excessive and duplicated
processes can comprise up to 40%{60% of a procurement company's capacity (Papa et al., 2019).
AI is capable of unlocking employees' workload for more strategic pursuits, thereby transforming
the transaction-oriented procurement toward the strategy-oriented procurement, which is known

24
as Procurement 4.0 (Marlinghaus, 2018; Loo and Santhiram, 2018). Our results indicate the great
potential of these AI-related initiatives in procurement.
Our ndings further shed light on how to implement AI strategies in procurement. In the absence
of AI smartness, automation alone can backre. This implies that a company should rst initiate
and strengthen its smart control algorithms, such as improving the prediction accuracy of its
recommendation systems, before considering a high level of autonomy. In order to ensure the eectiveness
of smartness, companies should help their employees get along with AI|that is, reduce
their biases and enhance their trust in algorithms. Our work also provides managerial implications
for online trading platforms aiming to embrace AI. Platforms such as Alibaba have initiated
the automatic request-for-quotation systems as a premium service provided for buyers (Alibaba,
2020b). Our study suggests that such automatic systems should be facilitated with a smart supplieridenti
cation system in order to reduce the wholesale price charged to downstream buyers as well
as reducing the ineciencies of supply chains arising from the double marginalization issue.
AI has become the universal engine of execution, driving the explosive growth of new business
models, but there is limited empirical research to understand and quantify how AI works and when
it is the most powerful (Terwiesch et al., 2020; Terwiesch, 2019). Our study is among the rst to
research how AI creates and delivers value in a critical business process, namely, procurement. We
hope that our paper will serve as a stepping stone for future AI-related business research.